We are now on session two.
The first question usually asked
by someone who wants
to write plays is
"What am I going to write?"
The answer is anything.
You can write anything,
in any form of writing.
And because of that,
it becomes difficult to write
because the source materials,
or let's say inspiration
of a writer for a play,
are as vast
as the universe
and what they know
in that “universe."
Now there are two sources
you can get from.
Most teachers
usually recommend
to write from
personal experience
since it's probably
the most convenient.
If there are no other sources,
then mine your own experiences.
It’s almost natural to do that.
To a certain extent,
whether or not
you are conscious about it
you will end up writing
from experience anyway.
Sometimes you tend
to do that subconsciously
when it's based from
repressed desires or fantasies.
Since it's you,
it's your voice and all of that.
So, okay personal experience, fine.
But not everything
will be based from your experience
especially when you write
about criminals,
unless you are one.
You can't limit yourself
from writing about other people
just because you didn't
experience their life.
Even the Nobel Prize winner,
Kazuo Ishiguro doesn't believe
that we should start writing
from personal experiences.
It's not essential,
even for newbie writers.
Your source materials
could be from what you see,
from your five senses,
you're aware of your surroundings.
Everything that stimulates
your senses
could be a source of material.
Even food and cooking
are source materials.
What you hear from the radio, TV,
or the neighborhood are materials.
Same goes with what
you read, see, observe.
Or when a film moves you.
Especially our preference for "pegs."
Something that looks
like this or that,
something like the film here
or the TV show there,
It's all possible,
why not?
That's material.
Something you felt,
whether emotional or physical.
Like pain you went through.
It's material.
Your sources for writing
can come from anywhere.
This is a whole gamut of sources
that you can take in.
That will be about 50%,
the choice of material that you-
50% of what you
want to write about
will come from
the choice of material.
The other 50% is your attitude
towards that material
because what you
want to write about
will have to be shaped
by how you want
to write about it.
What is your take on this?
What do you want to say?
You could make a play
about corruption in politics
and it can be
the most apolitical play ever,
Only because your attitude
towards it is not political at all.
And vice versa.
You can talk about love
of two individuals
but at the same time
view it as a political negotiation.
It's the marriage
of these two things.
How you visualize and interpret it
will be your material.
That is your subjectivity
as a writer.
For me, what matters
eventually, ultimately
in the long run,
is your sheer understanding
of the play.
Your perspective is what creates
uniqueness to your work
because you saw something
special in the material.
This is what divides writers.
Some writers only see
drama in the world,
the depth of emotion
in every situation.
Another basic way
of looking at it is
some writers always see
the comedy in every situation.
Even in the face of tragedy,
they still see comedy.
I co-wrote “Goyo: Ang Batang Heneral.”
We all know
Gregorio del Pilar is a hero.
Of course he is.
He did such a heroic act in Tirad Pass.
But the manner of his death
was, in a way, comic for me.
Director Jerrold Tarog
may show it differently.
It depends on the framing.
That's why he said the difference between
comedy and tragedy is the framing.
You can talk about death
and cry over it or laugh about it.
Let me tell you how he died.
They were holding on
to Tirad Pass, right?
And the Americans couldn’t attack
because the Filipinos
had stronger defenses.
Wherever they went,
Filipinos shot at them from above.
Until one Filipino
guided the Americans
to the other mountain.
Okay?
So it got quiet.
Filipinos were cheering,
"Hurray! We won!"
"They retreated already!”
But actually, the Americans
had found another way.
Now, Gregorio couldn’t see
the opponents.
His comrade warned him
to be careful and to stay down
because the Americans
could be up there.
But he stood up.
And that’s how he was shot.
Now you can look at it
in a tragic way
but you can also look
at it in a comic way, right?
"Where are they?"
Boom. Dead.
It was an instant death
because he was shot here.
That’s an example
of how you frame.
When I asked you what you
want to write about,
a good take-off would be
to write about something
that has an impact on you.
Now that impact,
when you process it
in your mind as a writer,
can turn into drama,
into comedy, or into horror.
or into something else.
Because it’s how
you understand the situation
or what you see
in the situation.
It could be anything.
Taking the example of SAF 44, Marawi,
what is the process of grief
of someone whose loved
one has been killed
as opposed to someone
whose loved one died of cancer?
So there are different processes
of grief you'll go through.
It depends on where you're coming from
in writing your material.
Your fascination to write about
what's ugly in life is interesting.
That's a nice quote.
"I write about the ugly truths of life."
The bad and the ugly are usually
what we hide in the cabinet
and what we conceal from others.
Maybe Maynard's focal
point of interest
is that he wants to expose them.
He wants to let that ugliness out,
expose its stench.
Or remove the secrets
surrounding it.
That’s the second most important
component in choosing a topic.
It’s almost automatic.
You were moved because there's drama
or you got inspired
because it made you laugh.
Very basic.
It elicited some kind
of response from you
since it created
a huge impact on you.
And you realized
that the source or material
is timeless.
Maybe it's been brewing in your mind,
you kept remembering it,
or you kept coming back
to it for a week
and you want to show it.
You see this material
as a stage play.
It’s a story to be told
and you want
to make it into a play.
Almost automatic, you'll know
what to say about the material.
It may not yet be fully developed
but you feel it in your gut
that you want to write it
because it’s meaningful
to you, your life, or to the world
or for whatever
greater reason there is.
I think there should
always be a greater reason
because if it's just an opinion,
then you might easily
change your mind about it.
Maybe that's why for me,
the depth and scope of a play
and the layers
that make it effective,
are dependent on
the strength of your truth claim.
This is the truth you believe in.
It’s more than an opinion.
I'd like to quote Alain Badiou,
from his magnificent book,
“Rhapsody for the Theater”
where he stated that our democracy
respects opinions
but hides the truth.
It means our democracy
allows us to express our opinions freely
while withholding the truth.
What kind of democracy is that?
This is one of the challenges.
Just in choosing the topic,
there are already so many options
to choose from.
I think it will help you choose
if you ask yourself,
"How does this subject
impact you as a writer?"
"Is it strong enough
to write about?"
Then go.
I’m not saying you shouldn’t write it
if it’s not as impactful to you.
That's just my belief.
Okay, let's test it.
I'll give you an exercise
which has four steps.
If you're watching this,
don't click fast forward.
It will ruin the whole concept
of the exercise.
For the first step,
choose a topic.
An issue or topic.
It could be a general topic
like freedom
or a specific topic
like reproductive health or divorce.
Choose a topic that you think
has truly made an impact on you.
A topic that you will
defend to the death
so that what you write
will have a strong effect
and you're sure
of what you're saying.
As if you're getting ready
to post a Facebook status
announcing, "This is my belief."
"Move aside, this is what I feel
about this topic!"
Probably, it would be helpful
if the topic is more specific.
Not just love,
since that's very broad.
Exactly what about it?
You want to talk about it
and write a few paragraphs.
Prose.
It's like your theses
on this particular topic.
Theses. T-h-e-s-e-s.
Meaning the different statements you want to say.
It's like this
because it's like this and so on.
I believe this because.
You don't just "think". You "believe".
Here we'll figure out,
at this moment at least,
the issues or topics that you value
and your insights on it.
Just write it.
I'll give you five minutes.
That's the first step.
Actually, I've considered writing this
for the longest time.
It's about polyamory.
"I believe in polyamory."
"Not just in gay relationships."
"I believe it makes love
open to possibilities"
"and in recognizing things
that are realistic and feasible."
"When the period of romance
and sweet nothings have faded,"
"it doesn't mean love has faded as well."
"It could have changed shape or form,"
"or looking for an outlet,
but still rooted to what it calls home."
"I believe in polyamory among gays"
"because this kind of love
is what the community needs,"
"especially if they've been
historically deprived of it."
- I love the "deprived" part.
- Love letter.
Alright, next.
My topic is about grief.
"So people have
different ways of grieving."
"Some people cry so easily."
"Others put on a strong facade,
but cry in the privacy of their own homes,"
"in their own private moments."
"Of course, that banks on the concept
that crying is a manifestation of grieving."
"Depending on which psychologist's page
you read it from,"
"there are five
or seven stages of grief."
"This is like a template
of what each person goes through"
"when grieving the loss of someone."
"And each person may go through
these stages at different speeds."
"Maybe go through all stages in one day
or maybe one year or a few years."
"And is it possibe to go through
the rest of your life grieving?"
"The final stage of grieving
is acceptance and/or hope."
"Does one ever really get to accept
the death of a loved one?"
"Maybe what we consider as acceptance
is actually a form of nonchalance."
"Surrendering to the fact
that someone's really gone."
"That someone will never be
with you again."
"And you will no longer be creating
memories with that one person."
"And all that remains are memories
with that one person."
"Memories that fade."
"Memories that are soon forgotten
or clouded by self-doubt"
"about the details and feelings
behind the memories."
"Until the time comes that you remember
that someone less and less each day."
So, what do you believe in then?
It doesn't end.
- The grief, it never ends?
So you will forever grieve...
a part of you...?
- Until you don't remember anything.
You mean grief ends
when forgetfulness comes in?
Something like that.
Until you forget,
is that what you mean?
- If you forget it,
then it ends, doesn't it?
You never totally accept it.
It just became biological.
Well, that's my opinion.
"Should a woman
become a mother?"
- Ay.
- My gosh.
"To ask this question
is indicative of the sexist roles"
"that society imposes on women."
"The term 'should' implies
that it is a requirement."
"Some even go as far as saying
that the woman's worth"
"relies solely on their choice
to have a child."
"When they hear a woman say
they don't want children,"
"they retort by saying,
"'You'll change your mind.""
"Or you will never feel
fulfilled without them."
"The fact that we shame a man
less for choosing to be a bachelor"
"as compared to a woman
who chooses not to marry and raise a child"
"shows that this expectation
weighs heavier on women."
"At the same time, however, we should not shame
women for choosing to have children."
"How modern society frames
a woman becoming a mother"
"has somewhat become negative."
"It seems negative for a woman
to choose to have children"
"because they are perceived
as conforming to a certain role."
"Again, this is an indication
of an unfair expectation."
"Ultimately, it should not be termed
as a 'should' statement"
"but as a "can" statement."
"A woman can become
a mother if she chooses to."
"It's not a matter of gender roles.
It is a matter of choice."
"And their choice on the matter
should have no bearing"
"on their identity as a woman."
- I feel like a tear fell.
[inaudible speech]
So that's why her
typing was so intense.
- I thought the laptop
was going to break.
Alright.
Almost all of your statements
have a stand, right?
(To Dingdong)
I think you should also tweak it
in such a way
that it becomes a stronger stand
and not just
an informative one.
Like, you know, we go through
this process of grieving etc.
What do you want
to say about grieving?
What do you believe
about people who grieve?
You probably had-
everyone of us had
moments of grief.
And you believe that moment
of grief will never go away.
You will never truly
accept the loss.
Something like that, right?
So you already wrote
your truth claim?
For the next step,
all the truth claims
you mentioned earlier...
you now have to destroy.
It’s like a debate
and this is your rebuttal.
Like if we're on Facebook,
you’re a troll.
You’re going to destroy
and contradict everything you said.
You need to have an argument
as strong as your first claim.
Look for something
that will devastate
and completely ruin
the manifesto you wrote.
It may not be
what you believe in
but I want you
to do the exact opposite
with as much weight
and as much passion
in terms of stating
the opposite stance.
Try to convince yourself
that what you said ten minutes ago
are all false claims.
I’ll give you five minutes again.